cs50:
    students:
        off premise storage,applications,machines.
        you don't want to cool and fix stuff.
    it is a rebranding of outsourcing jobs.
    possible because speed is faster hence it is as good as photos being in your own space.

    IaaS: Infrastructure as a service,started by amazon.
    
    easy to scale up and down (it is automatic/ autoscaling) when say your website gets mentioned on buzzfeed.
    computers crash because they have finite resources,and cpu cycles,and it somepoint
    routers drop data,or server starts using virtual space,and eventually server goes down.

    you can do autoscaling based on traffic,say if 80% of threshold crossed scale up and vice versa,this is called elastic in aws.

    downside: 
        security:
            giving whole data to someone elses computer.
        can use private cloud:
            like having your own servers.
        you need internet access to access it.
            hooks:
                reaction to some reaction,like everytime i push to github,grab from there to amazon,it is called continuous deployment.
                you run tests called continuous integration.
        latency
        
        trust
            note: github comes with github enterprise,you can run it on your  own server.
        if something goes down:
            you have no control over things.
        
        eg. somebody removed left-pad from node repository and when they did npm install in server it failed.hence cloud can be risky.

    cloud saves space,time and work and labour.
    servers can have 16 even 64 cpu's,and tens of gigabytes of Ram and terabytes of storage.

    on cloud we use virtualization,so we don't have one os running on one machine.
    and so resources are used appropriately. 

    in virualization one machines acts like many and hypervisor is a software this allows us to do so,a hypervisor can run on hardware or on host os.

    containerization is even light weight version of virtualization but containerization cannot replace virualtization as containers are just processes.

    --



module 1:
    
    computing :
        mean to solve any goal oriented activity.
        or an executing algorithm.  
    
    centralized computing:
        one computer and multiple jobs are submitted and done by that computer.
    
    distributed computing:
        multiple machine acting like one and performing a single task,connected through a network.
    
        peer to peer network is a distributed system.
    
    Grid computing:

    

university academy:
    cloud refers to servers that are accessed over the internet located remotely.
    computing refers to using these resouces to execute an algorithm.

    it is on demand availablity of computer systems resouces and computing power without direct active management by the user.

    properties of cloud computing:
        on demand.
    
AWS CERTIFIED PRACTIONER:
-------------------------
    cloud practitioner is a foundational certificate,
    there are three levels:
        foudational
        associate
        professional
    cloud practioner is a foundational certificate,equivalent of six months of fundamental aws cloud and industry knowledge.

    

    create a aws account,create a free tier account.
        on aws.amazon.com
    
    go to management console as root.



    what is cloud computing:
        a server contains a processor,and RAM and storage to store data.
        we also have routers,swithches,databases etc.

        earlier people would buy server and put it in a garage and get an office later and then a data center for servers,and it worked for very long.
        the problems were,pay for the rent for the data center,pay for power supply ,cooling,maintenance. Adding and replacing hardware takes time and scaling is limited.
        hire 24/7 team to monitor the infrastructure.
        and how to deal with disaster like earthquake fire ,power shutdown.


        cloud computing is the on-demand delivery of compute power,database storage,applications,and other IT resources.
        through a cloud services platform with pay-as-you-go pricing.

        you can provision exactly right type and size of computing resources you need.

        you can access these resources instantly.
        simple way to access servers,storage,databases and a set of application services.

        AWS owns and maintains the network-connected hardware required for these application services,while you provision and use what you need via a web application.

            gmail is an email cloud service.
            netfix is on AWS
        
        the deployment models of the cloud:
            private cloud:
                cloud services used by a single organisation,not exposed to the public.
                your own private data center but managed by someone else.
                you have complete control
                security for sensitive applications
                meet specific business needs
            public cloud:
                three big players:
                    microsoft azure
                    google cloud
                    aws
                cloud resources owned and operated by a third party cloud service provider delivered over the Internet.
            Hybrid cloud:
                keep some servers on premises and extend some capabilities to the cloud,your own infrasture and some servers from aws.
                control over sensitive assets in your private infrastructure.
                flexibility and cost effectiveness of the public cloud.
            
        five characteristics of cloud computing:
            on demand self service.
                no need of human intervention.
            broad network access: can be accessed by diverse clinet platforms.

            multi tenany and resource pooling: multiple customers can share the same infrastructure and applications with security and privacy.
            mutliple customers served from same physical machines

            rapid elasticality and scalability:
                can scale up and down on demand.
            
            measured service
                usage is measured,users pay correctly for what they have used.
    
    advantages:
        trade capital extensse(CAPEX) for opeational expense (OPEX)
            pay on demand: don't own hardware
            reduced total cost of ownership (TCO) and opeartional expense(OPEX)
        benefit from massive economics of scale.
            prices are reduced as aws is more efficient due to large scale.
        stop guessing capacity:
            scale based on actual measured usage.
        increase speed and agility
        stop spending money running and maintaining data centers.
        go global in minutes:leverage the aws global infrastructure.
    

    problems solved by cloud:
        flexibility:change resource types when needed
        cost effectiveness:pay as you go,for what yo use
        scalability:accomodate larger loads by making hardware stronger or adding addititional nodes
        elasticity:ability to scale out and scale in when needed.
        high availalbity and fault tolerance: build across data centers
        agility: rapidly develop test and launch software applications.
    


    types of cloud computing:
        infrastruture as a service(Iaas)
            provide buliding blocks for cloud IT
            provides networking,computing,data storage space in its raw form
            highest level of flexibility
            easy parallel with traditional on-premises IT
        Platform as a Service(PaaS)
            removes the need for your organization to manage the underly ing infrastucture.
            Focus on the deployment and management of your applications
        Software as a Service(SaaS)
            completed product that is run and mange dby the service provider.
        
    on premise                 IaaS              Paas             Saas
     
     applications            applications       applications    everything by aws
     data                    data               data
     runtime                 runtime
     middleware              middleware
     os                      os
     virtualization
     servers
     storage
     networking




    IAAS:
        Amazon EC2 on AWS
        GCP,Azure,Digital Ocean,Linode etc
    PAAS:
        Elastic Beanstalk(on AWS)
        heroku,Google App Engine(GCP),windows Azure
    SAAS:
        many aws services (eg rekognition for ml by aws)
        google apps (gmail),dropbox,zoom
    

    pricing in aws:
        aws has 3 pricing fundamentals,following the pay-as-you go pricing model

        compute:
            pay for compute time
        storage:
            pay for data storaged in the cloud.
        data transfer out of the cloud:
            for networking. 
            data transer IN is free.
        
        solves the expensive issue of traditional IT.

    
    AWS history:
        2002 internally launched.
        2003 amazon infrastructure is one of their core strenth,idea to market.
        2004 launched publicly with SQS
        2006 Re-lauched publicly with SQS,S3,and EC2
        2007 launded in europe

        now dropbox,airbnb,netflex,nasa run on it.

    AWS cloud number facts:
        aws is the top leader,
        followed by microsoft.
        then google.
        alibaba cloud,Oracle,IBM,
    
        in 2019 AWS had 35 billion in annual revenue.
        AWS had 47% of market and microsoft had 22%

        over 1 million active users.

    AWS usecases:
        to build sophisticated and scalable applications.
        applicable to a diverse set of industries.
        can be used for data analytics to host websites,to backup storage.
        gaming servers etc.
    
    AWS global infrastructure:
        AWS regions
        AWS availability zones
        AWS data centers
        AWS edge locations/points of presence.
    
        regions are all around the world even in mumbai.
        each region is connected via a private network of aws.
        each region has availabity zones say 3 each

        AWS has regions all around the world:
            names can be us-east-I ,eu-west-3,ap-south-1 for mumbai ap is asia pacific, me-south-1 for middle east
        A region is a cluster of data centers
        Most AWS serives are region-scoped.
    
    how to choose a region:
        compliance: with data governance and legal requirements,data never leaves a region without your explicit permission,hence have to launch in that country.
        proximity to customers: reduce latency
        available services: within a region new services and new features aren't avaialbe in every region.
        pricing: pricing varies region to region and is transparent in the service pricing page.

    Availability zones:
        each region has a many availabity zones usually 3 min 2 and max 6,
        eg sydney: ap-southeast-2
         has ap-southeast-2a ap-southeast-2b and ap-southeast-2c 

        each of these zones are one or more data centers with redundant power and networking and connectivity.
        they are separeate from each othe rso taht they are isolated from disasters.
        they are connected with high bandwidth ultra-low latency networking.
        hence forming a region.

    AWS points of presence(edge locations):
        amazon has 216 points of presence (205 edge locations & 11 regional caches)
        in 84 cities across 42 countries.

        content is delivered to end users with lower latency.

    
    AWS has global services:
        identity and Access management (IAM)
        route 53 (dns service)
        cloudFront(content delivery network)
        WAF (web application firewall)
    MOST AWS services are region-scoped:
        Amazon EC2 (IaaS)
        Elastic Beanstalk(PaaS)
        Lambda (Function as a service)
        Rekognition (Software as a Service)


in management console:
    at top right you have region,generally use one geographically close.
    services on left corner to see all available services
    you also have a search bar.
    the region will show global if the service is global.
    resouces change from region to region as those services are regional.
    if service not available you can switch the region.

shared responsilbity model diagram:
    if defines what is your responsiblity and what is aws's
    customer is responsible for security in the cloud.
    AWS is responsible for security of the cloud.
        hardware etc,availability,compute,database,networking,regions,edge location.
    you accept their policy when you use aws.
    you can't abuse the cloud.
